Data collections and collection references (#3233)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/content-collections.mdx

  <Since v="2.0.0" />
</p>

> **Content collections** are the best way to author content in any Astro project. Content collections are a feature of Astro that help manage your content files in a project. Collections help to organize your content, validate your frontmatter, and provide automatic TypeScript type-safety for all of your content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Content collections** are the best way to manage and author content in any Astro project. Collections help to organize your documents, validate your frontmatter, and provide automatic TypeScript type-safety for all of your content.
```

> 

Author: Reading this section I can _immediately_ tell who wrote it 😅 Guess sell-y marketing speak was inevitable. What if we rewrite the first sentence to simply:

> **Content collections** are the best way to author content in any Astro project.

> 

Author: Update: I also feel like the first and second sentence say _almost_ the same thing. What if we cut out the second sentence and do this instead:

> **Content collections** are the best way to manage and author content in any Astro project. Collections help to organize your documents, validate your frontmatter, and provide automatic TypeScript type-safety for all of your content.

> 

Reviewer: Yup, I like that! I'll commit that change for you.

## What are Content Collections?

A **content collection** is any directory inside the reserved `src/content` project directory, such as `src/content/newsletter` and `src/content/authors`. Only content collections are allowed inside the `src/content` directory. This directory cannot be used for anything else.

> A **collection entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection directory. Entries can use content authoring formats including Markdown (`.md`) and MDX (`.mdx`) or as data formats including YAML (`.yaml`) and JSON (`.json`). You can use any filename you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme (lower-case, dashes instead of spaces) to make it easier to find and organize your content.

Author: Good point! I agree documenting the underscore pattern is useful, but this isn't _quite_ right. Underscore files will still be included in the build if you're using them for, say, relative image paths or MDX component imports. They're just excluded _from collection queries._ Wondering if this is the best place to explain that given it's the intro?

> A **collection entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection directory. Entries can use content authoring formats including Markdown (`.md`) and MDX (`.mdx`) or as data formats including YAML (`.yaml`) and JSON (`.json`). You can use any filename you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme (lower-case, dashes instead of spaces) to make it easier to find and organize your content.

Reviewer: Ok, so rather than get into more detail here, what about dropping that you can name them whatever you want entirely:

> A **collection entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection directory. Entries can use content authoring formats including Markdown (`.md`) and MDX (`.mdx`) or as data formats including YAML (`.yaml`) and JSON (`.json`). We recommend using a consistent naming scheme (lower-case, dashes instead of spaces) for your files to make it easier to find and organize your content, but this is not required.

> A **collection entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection directory. Entries can use content authoring formats including Markdown (`.md`) and MDX (`.mdx`), or as data formats including YAML (`.yaml`) and JSON (`.json`). You can use any filename you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme (lower-case, dashes instead of spaces) to make it easier to find and organize your content.

Reviewer 2: Nit: unnecessary comma
```suggestion
A **collection entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection directory. Entries can use content authoring formats including Markdown (`.md`) and MDX (`.mdx`) or as data formats including YAML (`.yaml`) and JSON (`.json`). You can use any filename you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme (lower-case, dashes instead of spaces) to make it easier to find and organize your content.
```

  - **newsletter/** 
    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
  - **blog/**
    - post-1.md
    - post-2.md
  - **authors/**
    - grace-hopper.json

>     - alan-turing.json

Author: Originally had two collections here, one content and one data. But I realized this _might_ make it confusing what "different types of content" means; does "type" mean content vs. data or something about the structure? Three collections should hopefully make that clearer!

### Defining a collection schema

Schemas enforce consistent frontmatter or entry data within a collection. A schema **guarantees** that this data exists in a predictable form when you need to reference or query it. If any file violates its collection schema, Astro will provide a helpful error to let you know.

Schemas also power Astro's automatic TypeScript typings for your content. When you define a schema for your collection, Astro will automatically generate and apply a TypeScript interface to it. The result is full TypeScript support when you query your collection, including property autocompletion and type-checking. 

> To define your first collection, create a `src/content/config.ts` file if one does not already exist (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). This file should:

Author: Okay hang on, super confused why punctuation would go inside the parens?

```ts
// src/content/config.ts
export const collections = {
  'blog': defineCollection({
    type: 'content',
    schema: z.object({ /* ... */ })
  }),
  'newsletter': defineCollection({
    type: 'content',
    schema: z.object({ /* ... */ })
  }),
  'authors': defineCollection({
    type: 'data',
    schema: z.object({ /* ... */ })

>   }),

Author: Debatable if this is needed. Happy to revert

})
```

> ### Defining collection references
> 
> Collection entries can also "reference" other related entries. A common example is a blog post that references reusable author profiles stored as JSON, or related post URLs stored in the same collection.
> 
> You can define these relationships using the `reference()` utility from your collection schema. This accepts a collection name and validates the entry identifier(s) in your frontmatter or data file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Defining collection references

Collection entries can also "reference" other related entries. 

With the `reference()` function from the Collections API, you can define a property in a collection schema as an entry from another collection. For example, you can require that every `space-shuttle` entry includes a `pilot` property which uses the `pilot` collection's own schema for type checking, autocomplete and validation.

A common example is a blog post that references reusable author profiles stored as JSON, or related post URLs stored in the same collection:
```
This is how I'm thinking of it in my head, so I've spewed an example that is maybe a little more user-oriented re: "defining your property with another entry!"

Just throwing some alt wording at you to see whether you think a slight tweak in nuance is helpful here.

Author: LOVE this example :clap

})
```

### Defining collection references

Collection entries can also "reference" other related entries. 

> With the `reference()` function from the Collections API, you can define a property in a collection schema as an entry from another collection. For example, you can require that every `space-shuttle` entry includes a `pilot` property which uses the `pilot` collection's own schema for type checking, autocomplete and validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `reference()` function from the Collections API, you can define a property in a collection schema as an entry from another collection. For example, you can require that every `space-shuttle` entry includes a `pilot` property which uses the `pilot` collection's own schema for type checking, autocomplete, and validation.
```
Adding the comma before Yan does!  :P

## Querying Collections

Astro provides two functions to query a collection and return one (or more) content entries: [`getCollection()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getcollection) and [`getEntry()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getentry).

```js
import { getCollection, getEntry } from 'astro:content';

// Get all entries from a collection.
// Requires the name of the collection as an argument.
// Example: retrieve `src/content/blog/**`
const allBlogPosts = await getCollection('blog');

// Get a single entry from a collection.
// Requires the name of the collection and either
// the entry `slug` (content collections) or `id` (data collections)
// Example: retrieve `src/content/authors/grace-hopper.json`
const graceHopperProfile = await getEntry('authors', 'grace-hopper');
```

Both functions return content entries as defined by the [`CollectionEntry`](/en/reference/api-reference/#collection-entry-type) type.

> ### Resolving references
> 
> When using [collection references](#defining-collection-references), you can use the `getEntry()` and `getEntries()` functions to retrieve the referenced entry `data`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using an entry's referenced data

Any [references defined in your schema](#defining-collection-references) must be queried separately after first querying your collection entry. You can use the `getEntry()` function again, or `getEntries()`, to retrieve the referenced entry from the returned `data` object. 
```
Ok, what do you think about something more along the lines of this? I feel like being more explicit about a "2-step query approach" might be helpful? Happy for you to adjust as necessary!

Possible headings? (Note, not just for SEO, but for someone scanning the page TOC and thinking of words that resonate: "Yes! That's what I'm trying to do!")
> Using an entry's referenced data
> Querying an entry's references
> Accessing referenced data

Author: I like "Accessing referenced data" the most 🏆

### Building for server output (SSR)

> If you are building a dynamic website (using Astro's SSR support), you are not expected to generate any paths ahead-of-time during the build. Instead, your page should examine the request (using `Astro.request` or `Astro.params`) to find the `slug` on-demand, and then fetch it using [`getEntry()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getentry). 

Reviewer 2: Not something from this PR, but since we're already here, it should be "ahead of time" instead to be consistent with other pages.
```suggestion
If you are building a dynamic website (using Astro's SSR support), you are not expected to generate any paths ahead of time during the build. Instead, your page should examine the request (using `Astro.request` or `Astro.params`) to find the `slug` on-demand, and then fetch it using [`getEntry()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getentry).
```

<p>{blogPost.data.title} — {remarkPluginFrontmatter.readingTime}</p>
```

> The remark and rehype pipelines only runs when your content is rendered, which explains why `remarkPluginFrontmatter` is only available after you call `render()` on your content entry.  In contrast, `getCollection()` and `getEntry()` cannot return these values directly because they do not render your content.

Reviewer 2: Nit: runs -> run so the verb agrees with the subject
```suggestion
The remark and rehype pipelines only run when your content is rendered, which explains why `remarkPluginFrontmatter` is only available after you call `render()` on your content entry. In contrast, `getCollection()` and `getEntry()` cannot return these values directly because they do not render your content.
```
